URL: https://newsletter.doomberg.com/p/in-praise-of-chris-wright

In Praise of Chris Wright - Doomberg Doomberg Subscribe Sign in In Praise of Chris Wright A full-throated endorsement of the Secretary of Energy nominee. Doomberg Nov 17, 2024 2,293 226 86 Share “ The reward for work well done is the opportunity to do more. ” – Jonas Salk Like others, we have watched with curiosity as President-elect Donald Trump has rolled out his nominees for the various leadership positions of his administration. Whatever your views on any particular candidate, an undeniable pattern has emerged. First, Trump is selecting people who strongly support the specific campaign promises on which he ran, and those chosen are vowing to implement them to the letter. Second, lack of prior government experience seems to be an attribute rather than a detriment. Finally, the helminthoid establishment in Washington appears utterly ill-prepared for the deluge that is set to befall them, and Trump can expect significant bipartisan resistance as it dawns on lawmakers just how literal he was being on the campaign trail. Of particular interest to this publication were the President-elect’s positions on energy. During his many rallies and speeches, candidate Trump vowed to be extremely supportive of domestic energy production, promising to unleash a wave of new investment in oil, natural gas, coal, and nuclear energy. He also committed to ending participation in various international climate change initiatives, much to the horror of those on the progressive environmental left. The shackles of federal regulation would soon be lifted, he said, and the US would come to dominate the global energy scene once again. For real this time | Getty Against this backdrop, President-elect Trump electrified those in industry by nominating Chris Wright to the position of Secretary of Energy on Saturday. We can think of no better person for the job. Consider his impressive biography. Wright earned an undergraduate degree in mechanical engineering from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) and did graduate work in electrical engineering at both MIT and the University of California, Berkeley. He was a pioneer in the development of US shale gas resources, creating enormous value for shareholders over the past two decades. He has grown his current company, Liberty Energy, into one of the premier energy industry service providers in North America. Finally, he is an investor in and board member of Oklo Inc., a next-generation small modular nuclear reactor (SMR) company that has seen its market cap soar in 2024. We need him on that wall | Getty Things get even more promising when one studies Wright’s policy positions on energy. In early 2024, Liberty Energy published a 180-page policy document titled “ Bettering Human Lives ,” and we are hard-pressed to find anything to disagree with. The ten “Key Takeaways” from the summary page read as follows: 1. Energy is essential to life and the world needs more of it! 2. The modern world today is powered by and made of hydrocarbons. 3. Hydrocarbons are essential to improving the wealth, health, and life opportunities for the less energized seven billion people who aspire to be among the world’s lucky one billion. 4. Hydrocarbons supply more than 80% of global energy and thousands of critical materials and products. 5. The American Shale Revolution transformed energy markets, energy security, and geopolitics. 6. Global demand for oil, natural gas, and coal are all at record levels and rising – no energy transition has begun. 7. Modern alternatives, like solar and wind, provide only a part of electricity demand and do not replace the most critical uses of hydrocarbons. Energy-dense, reliable nuclear could be more impactful. 8. Making energy more expensive or unreliable compromises people, national security, and the environment. 9. Climate change is a global challenge but is far from the world’s greatest threat to human life. 10. Zero Energy Poverty by 2050 is a superior goal compared to Net Zero 2050. Couldn’t have said it better ourselves | Liberty Energy What’s not to like? The first nine of these takeaways are objectively true statements of fact, although few executives of publicly traded companies have had the courage to say them out loud. Wright has consistently done so throughout his career. The last is a brilliant reformulation of the climate change debate, as it forces a consideration of the impact on humans, not just the impact of humans. Wright’s nomination is sure to trigger vigorous opposition by all the predictable people, and we hope he is well prepared to run the gauntlet of personal destruction that the left will undoubtedly use to derail him. Should he win approval in the Senate, Wright has the opportunity to be a historic and transformational figure. His talent, knowledge, leadership attributes, and track record of success make him more than qualified for the job. Count us among those excited at the prospect. “ ♡ Like” this piece to put your thumb on the scale. If you’re interested to hear from Wright himself, listen to this episode of Energy News Beat , featuring a discussion with Wright and yours truly, recorded in March of this year. 2,293 226 86 Share Previous Next Discussion about this post Comments Restacks Doomberg Nov 18, 2024 Author This is officially our most liked piece ever. Says something, no? Reply Share 5 replies John Harpole Nov 17, 2024 Liked by Doomberg We should all be very excited about this nomination. I have known Chris personally for over 20 years and his enthusiasm for energy humanism is contagious. His impeachable fact-based beliefs will be a true threat to the Church of Carbon! Reply Share 1 reply by Doomberg 224 more comments... Top Latest Discussions No posts Ready for more? Subscribe © 2026 Doomberg · Privacy ∙ Terms ∙ Collection notice Start your Substack Get the app Substack is the home for great culture This site requires JavaScript to run correctly. Please turn on JavaScript or unblock scripts