URL: https://newsletter.doomberg.com/p/falkland-around

Falkland Around - Doomberg Doomberg Subscribe Sign in Falkland Around Will Milei impede the formation of a mini-petrostate next door? Doomberg Sep 09, 2026 ∙ Paid 691 154 29 Share “I was spoiled by theater, where there is no editor.” – Anthony Edwards In March of 2013, 1,517 inhabitants of what the United Nations (UN) officially refers to as the Falkland Islands (Malvinas) went to the polls to vote on a sovereignty referendum. Residents were asked whether they wanted to remain an overseas territory of the United Kingdom (UK), and in a result that would make dictators the world over blush, only three voted against the measure, and one spoiled their ballot. The resulting 99.8% affirmative vote is higher than even possession itself, which, last we checked, was just 90% of the law. The UN has included the islands on its list of Non-Self-Governing Territories since 1946, simply noting that a sovereignty dispute exists between the UK and Argentine governments over the territory. The bit in parentheses is a nod to the latter’s historical naming claims. A resolution adopted by the UN General Assembly in 1965 called for the two governments to find “ a peaceful solution to the problem, bearing in mind the provisions and objectives of the Charter of the United Nations and... the interests of the population of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas). ” Sure looks British | Channel 4 The British interpret the 2013 referendum vote as decisively satisfying the Assembly’s guidance in their favor, while the government of Argentina vigorously rejects this notion. The Malvinas issue is one of the few on which practically all Argentinians remain unified, save perhaps for the primacy of Messi over Ronaldo. The scars of the 74-day war over the islands—a conflict fought in 1982 in which nearly 1,000 people perished—still cut deep in the South American nation. As so often happens, the imminent prospect of significant hydrocarbon riches is bringing this simmering conflict back to a boil: “ Argentina’s president has heightened tensions with the UK over the Falkland Islands, warning he will impose economic sanctions on firms which exploit oil close to the British overseas territory. In a national address, Javier Milei said the ‘winds of change’ favoured Argentina’s claim to the islands, emboldened by signs the US might reconsider its stance of neutrality on the issue. Milei said the Sea Lion oilfield, where a British and an Israeli firm are due to begin exploration work, was a ‘clear and present danger.’ Foreign Secretary Ed Miliband said the UK’s position on the islands was ‘unwavering,’ and they would remain British as ‘that is the overwhelming position of the Islanders.’ ” Definitely not British | Getty For the approximately 3,600 people who live on the Falkland Islands today, the Sea Lion development represents a potentially substantial influx of new wealth. The deal cut by this joint venture calls for a 9% royalty payment to the Falkland Islands Government (FIG), plus an additional corporate tax charge of 26% on adjusted upstream profits. Milei’s nationally televised gambit to upset progress in the oilfield may foretell a potent rearrangement of geopolitical power that could scramble historical claims up and down the Western Hemisphere. If we’re right, the fight over the Sea Lion oil resource is far more consequential than the hydrocarbon prize on offer, ample as that might be. Let’s make some predictions by pulling apart this deeply complex situation. This post is for paid subscribers Subscribe Already a paid subscriber? Sign in Previous Next © 2026 Doomberg · Privacy ∙ Terms ∙ Collection notice Start your Substack Get the app Substack is the home for great culture This site requires JavaScript to run correctly. Please turn on JavaScript or unblock scripts