URL: https://newsletter.doomberg.com/p/escalation-clauses

Escalation Clauses - Doomberg Doomberg Subscribe Sign in Escalation Clauses Heads nobody wins, tails Europe loses. Doomberg Sep 22, 2026 ∙ Paid 828 312 30 Share “I think gas prices are a conspiracy.” – Tom Braidwood On Sunday, a world chronically short of diesel woke up to the happy news that Ukraine—undoubtedly with the full support of those who currently occupy positions of power across Europe and Great Britain, and perhaps even the US—had caused significant damage at the Gazpromneft Moscow Refinery, a facility capable of handling 245,000 barrels per day (bpd) of oil. In the weeks leading up to the Moscow attack, the Ryazan Oil Refinery (320,000 bpd), Saratov Refinery (140,000 bpd), Syzran Refinery (150,000 bpd), and Yaroslavl Refinery (300,000 bpd) were also hit, while reports circulated on Monday morning that Ukrainian drones had attacked the Bashneft-Ufaneftekhim Oil Refinery (190,000 bpd) as well. We are undoubtedly missing others. Much rejoicing | AP In unrelated news, voters in Germany expressed a certain amount of dissatisfaction with the country’s direction of travel, dealing a wildly embarrassing blow to its hapless chancellor, Friedrich Merz. Despite solidifying his place as the most unpopular leader in modern German history, Merz intends to keep pretending he has a mandate to lead, at least for now: “ German Chancellor Friedrich Merz on Sunday vowed to stay in office to press ahead with reforms despite heavy losses for his Christian Democratic Union party and a surge in support for the far right and far left in regional elections. Merz’s conservatives won just 4.9 per cent of the vote in the north-eastern state of Mecklenburg-Vorpommern, the party’s worst result in any state election in Germany’s postwar history. The far-right Alternative for Germany (AfD) doubled its share of the vote and became the largest party in the former East German state. The outcome means the CDU will fail to gain any seats in the regional parliament, according to preliminary results from state election authorities. ” No seats? No problem… | Getty Perusing the headlines in Germany’s neighbor to the west, where diesel prices hit an all-time record of $10.50 per gallon on Sunday, we learn that the political establishment is worried about developing unrest among the masses: “ In France, concerns are mounting that the cost-of-living crisis may spiral into wider unrest. Fishermen blockaded several ports and a fuel depot along the Mediterranean coast in the past week. Meanwhile, calls are multiplying on social media to resume the Yellow-Vests protests, a grass-roots movement that started in 2018 and later morphed into nationwide riots. French far-right leader and presidential candidate Marine Le Pen is among the politicians calling for a major cut in fuel taxes to deal with the crisis. ” Here too, the country’s leader is setting records for unpopularity. President Emmanuel Macron’s approval rating has fallen to a low of 16% , levels that would have triggered an honor-salvaging resignation in prior times. Not so for Macron, who seems intent on riding things out until his term expires in 2027. It is now certain that a full-blown and extended global diesel emergency is unavoidable, and the only questions remaining are those of degree and fallout. Unfortunately for the world, but especially for those living in Europe, we can think of four highly probable ways in which things are about to get even worse. In isolation or in normal times, each of these would constitute a serious development. Taken together and in the current context, this four-bet parlay of doom would usher in historically unprecedented levels of crisis. We might as well get ahead of things and prepare accordingly. This post is for paid subscribers Subscribe Already a paid subscriber? Sign in Previous Next © 2026 Doomberg · Privacy ∙ Terms ∙ Collection notice Start your Substack Get the app Substack is the home for great culture This site requires JavaScript to run correctly. Please turn on JavaScript or unblock scripts