URL: https://newsletter.doomberg.com/p/maitres-chez-nous

Maîtres Chez Nous - Doomberg Doomberg Subscribe Sign in Maîtres Chez Nous Consider Alberta unstuck. Doomberg Aug 28, 2026 ∙ Paid 793 237 27 Share “For what were all these country patriots born? To hunt, and vote, and raise the price of corn?” – Lord Byron In the hotly contested Québec provincial election of 1962, incumbent Liberal Premier Jean Lesage’s central campaign issue centered on the nationalization of Hydro-Québec, the province’s array of privately held electricity-generating companies. Leveraging the poignant slogan “Maîtres Chez Nous”—a phrase that translates to “masters in our own house”— Lesage hammered home the risk of letting anglophone business elites control critical goods and services in the French-speaking Canadian enclave. The rallying cry would be used throughout Québec’s so-called “Quiet Revolution,” a period that saw the rapid modernization of the province and increasing assertions of the right to self-determination. The cultural, linguistic, and ancestral differences between Québec and the rest of Canada define one of the most pressing internal fault lines undercutting Canadian unity, which makes Prime Minister Mark Carney’s decision to invoke the phrase during the prepared remarks of his remarkable press conference last Saturday all the more significant. Carney assembled the gaggle to explain why trade talks between the US and Canada had just collapsed, and his message to Canadians could not have been clearer: this was an existential fight that would require collective sacrifice. To drive his point home, he repeated the phrase in both of Canada’s official languages. The residents of Québec undoubtedly heard their prime minister say, “I see your anglophone, and I raise you an American.” We row together | Getty That most Americans aren’t aware, in the towering shadows they cast, that Canadians even exist feeds the mostly one-sided tension between the two nations, which otherwise enjoy one of the largest and most economically vibrant trading relationships in the world. As is widely reported by now, US President Donald Trump and his Canadian counterpart have thrown this mutually lucrative arrangement into disarray, and who knows on which rung of the escalation ladder they’ll be standing by the time this missive comes to press. For Carney to invoke such language raises the stakes of the game he is ultimately playing. To most outside observers, that game is obvious. Carney wants to protect politically sensitive domestic industries and is willing to call Trump’s bluff to do so. As the only living human to have headed the central bank of two sovereign countries, Carney has certainly been involved in many high-stakes negotiations, and perhaps he senses that the upcoming midterm elections in the US make going all in the right play. Through this lens, the success of Carney’s gambit will be measured by the terms of whatever trade deal ultimately emerges from this surprisingly competitive negotiation. There is, of course, an alternate interpretation of the game being played. For nearly two years, we have chronicled for our readers one of the unlikeliest political transformations of high consequence in the modern era: Carney’s metamorphic shift from stout climate-change warrior to the best friend the hydrocarbon industry has ever had. This particular drama looks set for its wildly unnatural final act. With all the pieces now in place, the trump cards will soon be revealed, and global energy flows are about to shift in ways few thought possible. Emotions might be running high, but such spasms are always temporary. Midstream assets, on the other hand, are best modeled as immortal. If we’re right, a pipeline construction boom is coming to Canada. This post is for paid subscribers Subscribe Already a paid subscriber? Sign in Previous Next © 2026 Doomberg · Privacy ∙ Terms ∙ Collection notice Start your Substack Get the app Substack is the home for great culture This site requires JavaScript to run correctly. Please turn on JavaScript or unblock scripts