 Hey everybody, Peter Zain here coming from Italy. It's a
 monastery that was built around a hermit
 hole probably in the 8th century, then it was remodeled in
 the 11th, and then in the 14th,
 you get the idea reused. Lots of things in Italy are like
 that. Anyway, that reminds me of what's
 going on right now in Poland. The Hungarian Prime Minister,
 Peter Magyar, Peter, good name,
 had made his first foreign trip to Warsaw to meet with the
 Prime Minister of Poland, Donald Tusk.
 Now, let's talk about what this isn't and then talk about
 what it is. So what it isn't
 is a political alliance that has to do with how the
 elections went. No, no, no, no, no. Peter Magyar
 is center-right, strongly right, I might underline, and the
 person he kicked out of power, Victor
 Orban, supposedly was also center-right, but was really
 just breathlessly corrupt and would bow
 down to anyone who wasn't Brussels. And now that he's gone,
 a number of his former ministers have
 actually fled the country because they know they're going
 to be put into jail,
 and we're going to have a series of parliamentary votes in
 Hungary that basically strips the ones
 that are left of any power. So it's a real transition, but
 from corruption to conservatism,
 not from conservatism to liberalism. On the Polish side of
 the equation, Donald Tusk is an avowed
 pan-Europeanist. He used to be an uppity-up in European
 power structures before he went back home
 and became prime minister. He's of the center-left, and so
 the two of them on domestic political issues
 have a lot of things they argue about. But that's not the
 point, because what this is
 is more of a strategic alliance. You see, Poland and
 Hungary, along with the Czech Republic and
 Slovakia, form a group called the Visegrad Group, which is
 four countries that tend to coordinate their
 operations at the EU level. But for most of the last decade
, they haven't, in part because Viktor Orban
 became more and more and more correct and more and more and
 more pro-Russian and less and less and less
 pro-European, and also because there were political ev
olutions in Poland, where the nationalists were
 in power before Donald Tusk for quite some time, and they
 just found it difficult to get along.
 That's probably behind us now. I don't want to say it's
 perfect, because we have a guy by the name
 of Robert Fico in Slovakia who's a little, a little odd,
 but not nearly as odd as some of the others have
 been in the last 10 years. Why does this matter? The
 European Union doesn't necessarily work on
 consensus. They have a weighted majority voting system
 among their council of ministers, that's the
 council of prime ministers, that is nauseatingly
 complicated. But the short version is, to get
 anything passed, a certain number of countries have to
 agree, and those countries have to represent a
 certain percentage of the population. And if you take
 Poland and Slovakia and Hungary and Czech Republic,
 you bunch them together into a single voting bloc, they
 have actually more voting power, because they're
 four countries, than France or Italy, two of the three big
 states in the EU, and they have about the
 same population. So this doesn't mean that the Central
 Europeans are going to suddenly start getting
 their way on everything, but it does mean now that they can
 really duke it out with the major
 established advanced powers on an equal basis from a
 decision-making point of view. Plenty of things to
 worry about. The primary one for everyone right now is, of
 course, Russia and the Ukraine war,
 and with Orban gone, there's a lot more room for consensus.
 And when you get past that and start
 talking about the nitty-gritty things of day-to-day
 government, like say, budgets, now we've got the
 Central Europeans who can actually stand up for themselves
 and get some things done. So all in all,
 reasonable first trip. Looks like it's been a smashing
 success. Nobody stabbed anybody,
 and in Europe these days, that's great.
