 Hey all, Peter Zion here, coming to you from a slightly
 chilly Colorado.
 Today we're taking a question from the Patreon page, and
 specifically,
 are there any medications out there in anti-aging or anti-
Alzheimer's that I think are going to
 change the math when it comes to global aging, specifically
 in the American and the Chinese
 contexts? Short version is no, longer version. There is
 something called monoclonal antibodies.
 The idea is it destroys or inhibits the growth of the bad
 cells in the brain, basically,
 that contribute to dementia and Alzheimer's specifically.
 But they are fabulously expensive,
 and they really do a shit job of what they say they do.
 According to the literature, which is all
 glow, it only reduces cognitive decline by like 30% over an
 18-month period, which is not enough
 really to move the needle in any meaningful way. The
 problem is, is starting about age 59 or 60,
 we all start going through a cognitive and physical decline
, and it really accelerates at age 62 to 63,
 and then that's one of the reasons why we retire at age 65,
 and why a lot of people take early
 retirement before that. So if you really want to solve this
 problem from a demographic issue, a labor
 force issue, a tax receipt issue, you have to extend the
 age of retirement well past 65, at least to 70.
 And you need a medical treatment that allows people to be
 productive for all of that extended period.
 Remember, people are already starting to slip before age 65
. There's also an issue of timing.
 Remember that the baby boomers, the largest generation in
 American history, are mostly retired already,
 and the youngest ones are already 60. So you're talking
 about less than one quarter of the cohort,
 if the drugs were ready today, could have their working
 lives extended for a few years. For most of them,
 it's already too late. And the next generation down, Gen X,
 it's my generation, there just aren't enough of us
 to really move the needle, even if we all could work an
 extra five years, and I assure you, we do not plan to.
 As for the rest of the world, the situation is actually far
 worse, because in the United States,
 at least our baby boomers had kids. We know those as the
 millennials. And maybe these technological
 leaps, these drugs that don't yet exist, will exist by the
 time it's time for the millennials to retire.
 That's another 20 years from now. But for the rest of the
 world, there really isn't a millennial
 cohort. So the people who are retiring right now in Japan
 and China and Korea and Taiwan
 and Germany and Italy and all the rest, you know, this is
 it. And so if the drugs aren't ready today,
 it's already too late. Now, there is one, one medication
 out there that may,
 may make a difference. And that's this class of drugs that
 is represented broadly by Ozempic,
 the idea that you can have people lose a lot of weight real
 quickly. Well, you know, being overweight,
 having cardiovascular disease, having heart congestions,
 that's not good for your health.
 And if these drugs do end up working in the long run as
 advertised, and they can reduce inflammation
 throughout your body and keep your body weight down, well,
 there might be a conversation to be had
 there. But these medications are new. They've only been
 around two, three years for any practical data.
 And we just don't know what the long-term impacts good or
 bad will be. So even if they were
 immediately, one-tenth the cost that they are right now,
 because they're very expensive,
 and even if we could apply them at mass, and even if they
 were 100% positive with no side effects,
 very doubtful for all of those things, it's still only a
 maybe because we just don't know yet.
 But for the Americans and the Chinese, where their equival
ence of the baby boomer is already one foot
 into retirement, no, it's too late. We don't even have a
 drug that's on the horizon at the moment that
 looks like it can solve the problems that we need to. About
 the only approach you can take is what
 they've been doing in Korea to a lesser degree in, say,
 Scandinavia, where they focus on human health
 from birth. The reason why the Koreans and the Swedes and
 the rest in that class live so long
 is they get a lot of exercise, they have a very good diet,
 and they have a high standard of emotional
 living writ large. It's not very sexy, requires a fair
 amount of elbow grease, and you have to start
 young, but that is still the only and best way to extend
 life that we've figured out so far.
