 Hey all, Peter Zion here coming to you from Dead Horse
 Point State Park. Weird name.
 Looking over here at the Colorado Basin, that is a potash
 facility, which means it's time to talk
 about processing. One of the biggest problems the United
 States faces in its re-industrialization
 effort isn't necessarily mining the minerals, it's turning
 them into something useful,
 putting them into an intermediate form that can then be
 used in manufacturing.
 One of the things the Donald Trump administration has done
 by enacting tariffs on everybody is
 make it more difficult for us to get the intermediate and
 finished materials that we need in order
 to do the industrialization process. What should have been
 done first, and this is not simply a
 criticism of the Trump administration, but also the Biden
 administration, the Trump administration
 before that, the Obama administration before that, and on
 and on, is that North America is very rich
 in any number of raw materials, but we need things like
 this in order to separate the ore, in order to
 get at the minerals that we are after, and then you turn
 them into an intermediate product like, say,
 semi-finished aluminum or copper or whatever it happens to
 be. We basically need to increase
 processing on the continent by roughly a factor of 20. It's
 different based on whatever mineral you're
 talking about, but the problem we have is that the Chinese
 have basically massively subsidized their
 processing industry. So China is not nearly as rich in the
 raw materials as we are here in North America
 or the Western Hemisphere writ large, but they've expanded
 their money supply. They've funneled
 everybody's private capital into whatever projects generate
 employment, and so if there's something
 that technically that they can achieve, even if they're not
 the low-cost producer, they subsidize
 the crap out of it in order to corner the market in
 whatever it happens to be. And then, because no one can
 compete with these subsidized prices, they basically drive
 other processors around the world out of business,
 and that's before you consider that environmental
 regulations in China are significantly less intense
 than they are in any third world country, much less first
 world country. So cheap capital, turning a blind eye
 towards environmental damage, they've tended to corner the
 market. Well, we only now have a few years to undo
 and rebuild some of our mistakes in order to have these
 materials locally, and unfortunately it's very
 difficult to consider being a manufacturing power, much
 less an industrial power, without having these things in
 place first. So we are now set up to have kind of the worst
 of all worlds. The Chinese system is breaking, it's going
 away,
 we're losing access to everything that they've been subsid
izing for us these last 30 years, and we have yet to build
 enough of that capacity at home to begin a serious re-
industrialization program, much less provide enough
 manufactured goods for our own population. So expect to see
 a lot more things like this in the future, all over the
 continent,
 because without them, we don't have anything to work from.
